# Tutorial V: Table of Contents, Index, and Glossary

## Table of Contents

A *table of contents* is a special list which contains the section numbers and corresponding
headings—as given in the standard form of the **sectioning commands**—together with the page
numbers on which they begin. There is also a *list of tables* and *list of figures* (the floating
elements in a document). The structure of these lists is simpler since their contents—the captions
of the floating elements—all are on the same level.

Standard LaTeX can automatically create these three contents lists. By default, LaTeX enters text
**generated by one of the arguments of the sectioning commands**[^note_sect] into the `.toc` file.
Similarly, LaTeX maintains a file for the list of figures (`.lof`) and a file for the list of
tables (`.lot`), which contain the text specified as the argument of the `\caption` command for
figures and tables.

[^note_sect]: pay attention: what this is saying is that the sectioning commands are what define
what goes in the ToC, LoT, and LoF. This might seem fairly obvious but it speaks to the fact that
a sectioning command might be a bit more complex than something like `\section{Introduction}`.

<!--  -->
To actually produce the table of contents, the list of figures, and the list of tables, you need to
issue commands (`\tableofcontents`, `\listoffigures`, and `\listoftables`). The lists are printed
at the point where these commands are issued. 

**Customizing**

Occasionally, you may find that you do not like the way LaTeX prints a table of contents or a list
of figures or tables. 

* You can fine-tune an individual entry by using the optional arguments to the sectioning command or
  `\caption` command that generates it

* Formatting commands can also be introduced with the `\addtocontents`

* If all else fails, you can edit the `.toc`, `.lof`, `.lot` files yourself
  - Edit these files only when preparing the final version of your document, and use a `\nofiles`
    command to suppress the writing of new versions of the files

<!-- page 39 -->
### Additional entries

Sectioning commands with a star (e.g. `\chapter*{name of chapter}`) are not entered automatically in
the table of contents. 

LaTeX offers two commands to insert such information directly into a contents file:

1. add to contents: `\addtocontents{file}{text}`

2. add contents line: `\addcontentsline{file}{type}{text}`

  Where: 

  * `file` is the extension of the contents file (usually `.toc`, `.lof`, or `.lot`)
  
  * `text` The actual information to be written to the file mentioned. LaTeX commands should be
    protected by `\protect` to delay expansion.

  * `type` is the type of the entry. 
  
    - For the `toc` file the type is normally the same as the heading according to the format of
      which an entry must be typeset
    
    - For the `lof` or `lot` files, either `figure` or `table` is specified

#### add to contents

The `\addtocontents` command is intended to enter user-specific formatting information. 

* e.g. generate additional spacing in the middle of a table of contents: 
  `\addtocontents{toc}{\protect\vspace{2ex}}`

#### add contents line

**Case 1**

The `\addcontentsline` instruction is usually invoked automatically by the document sectioning
commands, or by the `\caption` commands. 

For example, a `\caption` command inside a `figure` environment saves the text annotating the figure
as follows: `\addcontentsline{lof}{figure}{\protect\numberline{\thefigure}captioned text}`

For this example, the entry contains numbered text and thus `\numberline` must be used to separate
the section number from the rest of the text for the entry in the text parameter. In this sample
command the word '`number`' refers to a number, and '`heading`' refers to the entry in the text
parameter: `\protect\numberline{number}{heading}`

**Case 2**

Sometimes `\addcontentsline` is used in the source to complement the actions of standard LaTeX (to add to the ToC).

For instance, in the case where you have used the starred form of a sectioning command (because you
do not want a heading number) and, thus, no information has been written to the `.toc` file, you
can write something like:

```Latex
\chapter*{Forward}
\addcontentsline{toc}{chapter}{\numberline{}Forward}
```

This would produce an indented `chapter` entry in the table of contents, leaving the blank the space
where the chapter number would go. Omitting the `\numberline` command would typeset the
word "Forward" flush left instead.

<!-- ≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈ -->
### Typesetting a contents list

As discussed above, content lists consist of entries of different types, corresponding to the
structural units that they represent. Apart from these standard entries, these lists may contain
any commands. 

A standard entry is specified by the command: `\contentsline{type}{text}{page}`

Where: 

* `type`: type of the entry, e.g. section or figure
* `text`: actual text as specified in the argument of the sectioning or `\caption` commands
* `page`: page number

Note that section numbers are entered as a parameter of the `\numberline` command to allow
formatting with the proper indentation. It is also possible for the user to create a table of
contents by hand with the help of the command `\contentsline`. 

For example: 

```Latex
\contentsline {section} 
  {\numberline {2.4}Structure of the Table of Contents}{31}
```

#### Format an entry in the ToC files

To format an entry in the table of contents files, standard LaTeX makes use of the following
command: `\@dottedtocline{level}{indent}{numwidth}{text}{page}`

Where: 

  * The last two parameters coincide with those of `\contentsline`[^note_2] 
  * `level`: the nesting level of an entry. This parameter allows the user to control how many
    nesting levels will be displayed. Levels greater than the value of the counter `tocdepth` will
    not appear in the table of contents
  * `indent`: total indentation from the left margin
  * `numwidth`: the width of the box that contains the number if `text` has a `\numberline` command.
    This is also the amount of extra indentation added to the second and later lines of a multiple
    line entry


Additionally, the command `\@dottedtocline` uses the following formatting parameters, which specify
the visual appearance of all entries:

* `\@pnumwidth`: the width of the box in which the page number is set

* `\@tocmarg`: the indentation of the right margin for all but the last line of multiple line
  entries (changed with `\renewcommand`)

* `\@dotsep`: the separation between dots, in *mu* (math units). It is a pure number(like 1.7 or 2).
  By making this number large enough you can get rid of the dots altogether. (Changed with
  `\renewcommand` as well.)


[^note_2]: since it is this command that usually invokes the `\@dottedtocline` command
<!-- sentence corrected (I think that's what they meant to say)  -->
