# Introduction

## A Brief History

LaTeX uses TeX's typesetting engine and macro system to implement a **declarative document
description language** based on that of a system called Scribe by Brian Reid. The appeal
of such a system is that a few high-level LaTeX declarations, or commands, allow the user to easily
compose a large range of documents without having to worry much about their typographical
appearance. In principle at least, the details of the layout can be left for the document designer
to specify elsewhere.
<!-- https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Scribe_(markup_language) -->

<!-- Note that in the context of typography, the word language does not refer exclusively to the variety of natural languages and dialects across the universe; it also has a wider meaning. For typography, "language" covers a lot more than just the choice of "characters that make up words", as many important distinctions derive from other cultural differences that affect traditions of written communication. Thus, important typographic differences are not necessarily in line with national groupings but rather arise from different types of documents and distinct publishing communities. -->


<!-- ≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈***≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈ -->
## The System

This section presents an overview of the vast array of files used by a typical LaTeX system with its
many components.

Although modern LaTeX systems are most often embedded in a project-oriented, menu-driven interface,
behind the scenes little has changed from the file-based description given here. The stability of
LaTeX over time also means that an article by Joachim Schrod on *The Components of TeX* [153] remains
the best source for a more comprehensive explanation of a TeX-based typesetting system.
<!-- [153] Joachim Schrod. "The components of TeX". MAPS, 8:81–86, 1992. -->
<!-- TeX needs a great number of supplementary components (files and programs) whose meanings -->
<!-- and interactions are often unknown; the structure of a complete TeX setup is explained. -->
<!-- http://www.ntg.nl/maps/pdf/8_18.pdf -->

In processing a document, the LaTeX program reads and writes several files, some of which are
further processed by other applications. These are listed in Table 1.1, and Figure 1.1 shows
schematically the flow of information behind the scenes (on pages 8 and 9)

### Document Input

The most obviously important files in any LaTeX-based documentation project are the input source
files. Typically, there will be a master file that uses other subsidiary files. These files most
often have the extension `.tex`. They are commonly known as "plain text files" since they can be
prepared with a basic text editor. Often, external graphical images are included in the typeset
document utilizing the graphics interface described in Section 10.2.

* The master file has extension `.tex`
* Code documentation for LaTeX typically carries the extension `.dtx`

### Structure and Style

LaTeX also needs several files containing structure and layout definitions: 

* class files with the extension `.cls`
* option files with the extension `.clo`
* package files with the extension `.sty`

Many of these are provided by the basic system set-up, but others may be supplied by individual
users.

LaTeX is distributed with five standard document classes: `article`, `report`, `book`, `slides`, and
`letter`. These document classes can be customized by the contents of other files specified either
by class options or by loading additional packages.

In addition, many LaTeX documents will implicitly input: 

* language definition files of the `babel` system with the extension `.ldf`
* encoding definition files of the `inputenc`/`fontenc` packages with the extension `.def`

<!-- page 7 -->
### Font resources

* The information that LaTeX needs about the glyphs to be typeset is found in TeX font metric files
  with extension `.tfm`
    - This does not include information about the shapes of glyphs, only about their dimensions
* Information about which font files are needed by LaTeX is stored in font definition files with
  extension `.fd`

Both types are loaded automatically when necessary. 
<!-- See Chapter 7 for further information about font resources. -->

### Formatted Output

The output from LaTeX itself is a collection of internal files (see below), plus one very important
file that contains all the information produced by TeX about the typeset form of the document.

TeX's own particular representation of the formatted document is that of a device-independent file
(extension `.dvi`). TeX positions glyphs and rules with a precision far better than 0.01μm
(1/4,000,000 inch). Therefore, the output generated by TeX can be effectively considered to be
independent of the abilities of any physical rendering device—hence the name. 

Some variants of the TeX program, such as pdfTeX and VTeX, can produce device-independent file
formats including the Portable Document Format (PDF) (extension `.pdf`), which is the native file
format of Adobe Acrobat.

The `.dvi` file format specifies only the names/locations of fonts and their glyphs—it does not
contain any rendering information for those glyphs. The `.pdf` file format can contain such
rendering information.

### Cross-references

Some of the internal files contain code needed to pass information from one LaTeX run to the next,
such as for

* cross-references extension `.aux`

* typesetting particular elements of the document such as the table of contents (`.toc`), the list
  of figures (`.lof`), and the list of tables (`.lot`)

* others are specific to particular packages (such as `minitoc` or `endnotes`) or to other parts of
  the system

### Errors, warnings, and information

Finally, TeX generates a transcript file of its activities with the extension 

* `.log`. This file contains a lot of information, such as the names of the files read, the numbers
  of the pages processed, warning and error messages, and other pertinent data that is especially
  useful when debugging errors

### Indexing

* A file with the extension `.idx` contains individual unsorted items to be indexed. These items
  need to be sorted, collated, and unified by a program like `makeindex` or `xindy`
    - For `makeindex`, the index style information file has an extension of `.ist` and its
      transcript file has an extension `.ilg`; in contrast `xindy` appears not to use any
      predefined file types
  
* The sorted version is typically placed into a file (extension `.ind`) that is itself input to
  LaTeX


### Citations and Bibliography

* Information about bibliographic citations in a document is normally output by LaTeX to the
  auxiliary file. This information is used first to extract the necessary information from a
  bibliographic database and then to sort it; the sorted version is put into a bibliography file
  (extension `.bbl`) that is itself input to LaTeX

* If the system uses BIBTeX for this task, then the bibliographic database files will have an
  extension of `.bib`, and 

* information about the process will be in a bibliography style file (extension `.bst`). 
    - Its transcript file has the extension `.blg`

### Using \specials

Because of the limitations of TeX, especially its failure to handle graphics, it is often necessary
to complete the formatting of some elements of the typeset document after TeX has positioned
everything and written this information to the `.dvi` file. 
 
This is normally done by attaching extra information and handling instructions at the
correct "geometrical position in the typeset document", using TeX's `\special` primitive that
simply puts this information at the correct place in the `.dvi` file. This information may be
simply the name of a graphics file to be input; or it may be instructions in a graphics language.

#### PostScript

Currently the most common such *secondary formatter* is a PostScript interpreter. To use this
method, all information output by TeX to the `.dvi` file, including that in the \specials, must be
transformed into PostScript code; applications to do this form part of all LaTeX systems.

### Seeing is believing
<!-- page 9 -->

Once the document has been successfully processed by TeX (and possibly transformed into PostScript),
you will probably want to take a look at the formatted text. This is commonly done on screen, but
detailed inspection of printed output should always be performed via printing on paper at the
highest available resolution. The applications available for viewing documents on screen still
(as of late 2003) vary quite a lot from system to system. Some require a `.dvi` file, while others
use a `.ps` file. A current favorite approach is to use a `.pdf` file, especially when electronic
distribution of the formatted document is required. Occasionally you will find that some
applications will produce much better quality screen output than others; this is due to
limitations of the different technologies and the availability of suitable font resources.

page 39-43


<!-- ≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈***≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈≈ -->
## Using This Book

* Chapter 1 gives a short introduction to the LaTeX system and this book.

* Chapter 2 discusses document structure markup, including sectioning commands and
  cross-references.

* Chapter 3 describes LaTeX's basic typesetting commands.

* Chapter 4 explains how to influence the visual layout of the pages in various ways.

* Chapter 5 shows how to lay out material in columns and rows, on single and multiple pages.

* Chapter 6 discusses floating material and caption formatting.

* Chapter 7 discusses in detail LaTeX's Font Selection Scheme and shows how to access new fonts.

* Chapter 8 reviews mathematical typesetting, particularly the packages supported by the American
  Mathematical Society.

* Chapter 9 describes support for using LaTeX with multiple languages, particularly the babel
  system.

* Chapter 10 covers the simpler extensions of LaTeX for graphics, including the use of PostScript.

* Chapter 11 discusses the preparation and typesetting of an index; the programs makeindex and
  xindy are described.

* Chapter 12 describes LaTeX's support for the different bibliographical reference schemes in common
  use.

* Chapter 13 explains how to use bibliographical databases in conjunction with LaTeX and how to
  generate typeset bibliographies according to publishers' expectations.
  